Let's pick up where we left off with Malware. So far, we've covered some of the
major types of Malware that can be found in the system, including Malware,
Viruses, Worms, Adware, Spyware and Ransomware. What if our attackers could not
only do malicious things like steal our data, but they could also steal our
computers resources like the CPU? Well, I'm sorry to tell you that actually
exists. There is Malware out there that can utilize someone else's machine to
perform a task that is centrally controlled by the attacker. These compromised
machines are known as Bots. If there are a collection of one or more Bots, we
call that network of devices a Botnet. Botnets are designed to utilize the power
of the Internet-connected machines to perform some distributed function. Take
mining Bitcoin, for example, mining Bitcoin requires a machine to perform some
computation that takes up your machine's resources. At the end, you may be
rewarded with some amount of Bitcoin. A popular attack has been creating Botnets
to do stuff like mine Bitcoins. So instead of having one computer run
computations, attackers can now have a thousand computers running computations
and raking in more and more Bitcoin. A backdoor is a way to get into a system if
the other methods to get in a system aren't allowed, it's a secret entryway for
attackers. Backdoors are most commonly installed after an attacker has gain
access to your system and wants to maintain that access. Even if you discovered
your system has been compromised, you may not realize that a backdoor to your
system exists. If it does, you need to lock it up before more damage can be
done. Another form of Malware that can be particularly problematic is a rootkit.
A rootkit by its name is a kit for root, meaning a collection of software or
tools that an admin would use. It allows admin level modification to an
operating system. A rootkit can be hard to detect because it can hide itself
from the system using the system itself. Sneaky little sucker. The rootkit can
be running lots of malicious processes, but at the same time those processes
wouldn't show up in task manager because it can hide its own presence. A logic
bomb is a type of Malware that's intentionally installed, after a certain event
or time has triggered, it will run the malicious program. There's a popular
logic bomb case that happened in 2006, wherein unhappy systems administrator at
a bank, set off a logic bomb and brought down a company's services in an attempt
to drop their stock prices. The former employee was caught and charged with
fraud, then sentenced to eight years in prison. Not the most logical Logic bomb.