Keeping mobile devices secure is super important. Think about the kind of data
that a mobile device can have. Email, personal files, photos, health data,
location data and so on. Mobile devices travel with us and they aren't protected
by the same level of physical security as a server in a data center. Mobile
devices are easily misplaced or stolen. So we need to be sure to secure these
devices. As we go through this video remember that many of the settings that we
will discuss can be automatically configured or required by policy using mobile
device management. We talked about both of these in a earlier video if you'd
like a refresher. One of the most basic protections you can enable on a
smartphone or tablet is a screen lock. A screen lock presents some kind of
challenge that you have to respond to in order to unlock the device. You might
enter a pin or password, you might draw a pattern on screen or you might use
biometric data like a fingerprint or even your face to unlock the device. No
protection is perfect. So we should use defense in depth to protect the data on
your mobile devices. What if someone steals the device and reboots it or takes
it apart to get at the storage directly? To help protect against this enable
storage encryption on your mobile devices. On some devices this is done by
default. But if it isn't you should enable that feature. We've talked a little
bit about protecting your device from an outside attacker. But what about
protecting the data on your device from an app that's installed on your device?
End users should be able to control which apps on their mobile device have
access to what data. Let's look at how you can see which apps are using or have
access to use specific types of private data on your device. Mobile operating
systems have defined permissions that control which app has access to which
systems or data. Each OS has a list of permissions and the app requests access
to the specific permissions that it needs. Mobile apps will request permission
either when they are first installed or when they first try to use the
permission. At times an end user might deny an app access to a permission that
it needs making that app unable to function properly. It might be up to you to
help them troubleshoot app permissions. For example, one permission controls
access to information about the device's location. A mobile device can use its
GPS cellular networking and Wi-Fi networking to determine the location of the
device. Determining the device's location uses a lot of battery power and is
also very sensitive from a privacy point of view. Still, knowing the location of
the device is critical for some apps. For example, obviously the app that you
use for mapping and navigation needs to know where the device is. As we covered
in an earlier video you can turn a mobile device's location services on and off.
You can also use the app permission settings on your device to control which
apps have access to location services when they are on. Let's take a look.
Here's how to do it in Android. Here's a list of all the permissions that apps
can request and if I select one I can see and control which apps have access to
my device's location. I can do the same thing in iOS and with other permissions,
for example, let's check which apps have access to record sounds through the
device's microphone. So here I have an iPhone. From the privacy setting I can
view all of the different categories of private data and control which apps have
access to which data. If I select one I can see and control which apps have
access to my device's microphone. Android and iOS use different names for the
type of permissions and private data that they can grant to apps but the basics
are the same. For more info we added a link to the permissions for Android and
iOS to the supplemental reading.