There is no getting around it, passwords are the most secure common safeguards
we have to prevent unauthorized account access. Unfortunately, our passwords may
not be as secure or strong as they should be. A common attack that occurs to
gain access to an account is a password attack. Password attacks utilize
software like password crackers that try and guess your password. And they work
extremely well, so don't try to reuse that fido password. It didn't secure your
bank account and it's not going to work here. Okay, moving on. A common password
attack is a brute force attack, which just continuously tries different
combinations of characters and letters until it gets access. Since this attack
requires testing a lot of combinations of passwords, it usually takes a while to
do this. Have you ever seen a CAPTCHA when logging into a website? CAPTCHAs are
used to distinguish a real human from a machine. They ask things like, are you
human, or are you a robot, or are you a dancer? In a password attack, if you
didn't have a CAPTCHA available, an automated system can just keep trying to log
into your account until it found the right password combination. But with a
CAPTCHA, it prevents these attacks from executing. Another type of password
attack is a dictionary attack. A dictionary attack doesn't test out brute force
combinations like ABC1 or capital ABC1. Instead, it tries out words that are
commonly used in passwords, like password, monkey, football. The best way to
prevent a password attack is to utilize strong passwords. Don't include real
words you would find in a dictionary and make sure to use a mix of capitals,
letters, and symbols. Without any fail-safes like CAPTCHAs or other account
protections, it would take a typical password cracker application about one
minute to crack a password like sandwich. But substantially longer to crack
something like what you see here, spelled s, @, n, capital D, w, h, number 1, c,
then another h. See how that's the same but also way harder to crack?