Throughout this course, there'll be one key acronym to keep in mind, the CIA.
No, I'm not talking about the U.S. Central Intelligence Agency, although they do
have a lot to do with national security. When I say CIA, I'm talking about
confidentiality, integrity, and availability. These three key principles are the
foundation for what's widely referred to as the CIA triad, a guiding model for
designing information security policies. These three principles will help you
develop security policies in the workplace and for your own personal
environments. Let's start with confidentiality. Confidentiality means keeping
things hidden. In I.T., it means keeping the data that you have hidden safely
from unwanted eyes. One particular method of confidentiality that you probably
use everyday is password protection. Only you, maybe your partner, should know
the password to gain access to your bank account online. For confidentiality to
work, you need to limit access to your data. Only those who absolutely need to
know how to gain access, should. The I in CIA stands for integrity. Integrity
means keeping our data accurate and untampered with. The data that we send or
receive should remain the same throughout its entire journey. Imagine if you
downloaded a file off the Internet, and the website you're downloading it from,
says the file is three megs. Then, when you download it, it turns out to be
about 30 megs. That's a red flag. Something happened during the download,
something potentially unsafe. An unwanted file may now be living on your hard
drive. As you'll learn in a later lesson, this happens all too often. Last but
not least. Let's look at the A in CIA, which stands for availability.
Availability means that the information we have is readily accessible to those
people that should have it. This can mean many things, like being prepared if
your data is lost or if your system is down. Security attacks are designed to
steal all kinds of things from you, time, material things, your dignity. Some
steal the time that you'll need to spend to get services back up and running.
Some security attacks will hold your system hostage, until you pay a ransom for
it. Sounds scary and it is but that's why you're here, to learn how to stop
these types of attacks from happening. Going through this course, you'll see how
every aspect of security revolves around these three key principles:
confidentiality, integrity and availability.